docs/intro/getting-started.md, before:

---
title: Getting Started
sidebar_position: 2
---

This article outlines the steps to scaffold a new webforJ app using the webforj archetypes. This archetypes provide a pre-configured project structure and starter code to quickly get a project up and running.

<!-- vale off -->
import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';

<!-- vale on -->


## Using the `hello-world` archetype

To create and scaffold a new `hello-world` project, follow these steps:

1) **Navigate to the proper directory**:
Open a terminal and move to the folder where you want to create your new project.

2) **Run the `archetype:generate` command**:
Use the Maven command below, and customize the `groupId`, `artifactId`, and `version` as needed for your project.

```bash
mvn -B archetype:generate \
-DarchetypeGroupId=com.webforj \
-DarchetypeArtifactId=webforj-archetype-hello-world \
-DgroupId=org.example \
-DarchetypeVersion=24.20 \
-DartifactId=my-hello-world-app \
-Dversion=1.0-SNAPSHOT
```

After running the command, Maven will generate the project files necessary to run the project.

### Run the app

Navigate into the newly created directory, and run the following command from the project’s root directory:

```bash
mvn jetty:run
```

This command uses the Jetty maven plugin to start a Jetty server. Once the server is running, open your browser and go to [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) to view the app.

:::info Licensing and watermark
For information on the licensing and the watermark present in unlicensed projects, see [this article](../configuration/licensing-and-watermark).
:::

Commit message:

docs: added table to archetype, still need to create component to get latest version

docs/intro/getting-started.md, after:

---
title: Getting Started
sidebar_position: 2
---

This article outlines the steps to scaffold a new webforJ app using the webforj archetypes. This archetypes provide a pre-configured project structure and starter code to quickly get a project up and running.

<!-- vale off -->
import DocCardList from '@theme/DocCardList';

<!-- vale on -->


## Using the `hello-world` archetype

To create and scaffold a new `hello-world` project, follow these steps:

1) **Navigate to the proper directory**:
Open a terminal and move to the folder where you want to create your new project.

2) **Run the `archetype:generate` command**:
Use the Maven command below, and customize the `groupId`, `artifactId`, and `version` as needed for your project.

```bash
mvn -B archetype:generate \
-DarchetypeGroupId=com.webforj \
-DarchetypeArtifactId=webforj-archetype-hello-world \
-DgroupId=org.example \
-DarchetypeVersion=24.20 \
-DartifactId=my-hello-world-app \
-Dversion=1.0-SNAPSHOT
```

| Argument             | Explanation                                                                 |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `-DarchetypeGroupId` | Identifies the "namespace" or organization responsible for the archetype. It is typically structured as a reversed domain name, such as `com.example`.|
| `-DarchetypeArtifactId` | Specifies the name of the archetype, such as `webapp-archetype`. This is the unique identifier for the archetype within the group.|
| `-DarchetypeVersion` | Specifies the version of the archetype you want to use. This ensures that the generated project is compatible with a specific version of the archetype.|
| `-DgroupId`          | Represents the namespace for the generated project. Typically structured like a Java package, such as `org.example` and is used to uniquely identify your organization or project domain.|
| `-DartifactId`       | Specifies the name of the generated project. This will be the name of the resulting artifact and the project folder.|
| `-Dversion`          | Defines the version of the generated project. A common convention is MAJOR.MINOR-SNAPSHOT, like `1.0-SNAPSHOT`, where SNAPSHOT denotes that the project is still in development.|


After running the command, Maven will generate the project files necessary to run the project.

### Run the app

Navigate into the newly created directory, and run the following command from the project’s root directory:

```bash
mvn jetty:run
```

This command uses the Jetty maven plugin to start a Jetty server. Once the server is running, open your browser and go to [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) to view the app.

:::info Licensing and watermark
For information on the licensing and the watermark present in unlicensed projects, see [this article](../configuration/licensing-and-watermark).
:::
